# 2025-03-22 2

Salutations Mayor Lurie.

Greetings Supervisor Sherrill

Salutations Supervisor Mandelman

Welcome Chairman Randy

Many of you have walked past or even inside this building countless times. 

But have you ever - truly - looked at it?

Have you noticed how unique and special this mansion is? 

Have you noticed that the garden extends the entire length of a city block? It has fronts on three streets? There's no other Mansion with a garden like this in northern San Francisco.

Can you imagine that the 
fence, gates, the path, the planting, the steps
all remain exactly as they were in 1925

Did you ever consider that the roof is made of imported Belgian slates? Not just a fake roof, but the entire roof. 

Have considered that the building is earthquake-resistant?

Tom! Can you knock on that column? 

Tom says: "It's solid!"

The structure is made of reinforced concrete.

Did you ever walk around the building and "say, gee, it's lovely on every single side of the building"?

It's not just fancy on front 
and then with cheap siding on the back 
like most houses in San Francisco.

Did you notice the building offers 
hundreds of examples of works of art 
in what is called the "golden era" of California art pottery?

And you probably didn't know that the final construction price was $20,000 under budget. 

Well, how did all these lovely things happen? 

It happened because there was this woman 
who happened to live about a mile away from here.
On 2229 Divisadero Street between Washington and Clay.
About a mile from here.

Julia Morgan, a Bay Area native, a San Francisco resident, 
first woman architect in California. 
First woman to graduate from the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris.

Unfortunately, we know more about her personal life 
than we do about her professional life. 

She gave few interviews.

As she said: "My buildings will be my legacy... 
they will speak for me — long after I'm gone."

Over the past five years, as I've walked this campus,
Julia has been speaking to me.

Julia is a supremely talented "building whisperer".

What are some of the special things she whispers about?

The style of the building is called Tudor Revival, 
just like a proper sixteenth century English manor house.

That means the decorations are more than just aesthetic; 
they must carry historic or symbolic meaning.

Example.

Just above the front door, there are two shields. 
Unadorned. Just shields. Like for a knight.

Well, why do you carry a shield? 
To protect yourself, of course.

But why here?

The shields whisper the answer:
"Come inside —
and the San Francisco Ladies Protection and Relief Society
will protect you"

I've spent a lot of time thinking about the largest decorations:

The two large terracotta panels on both wings of the second floor. 

Each plaque contains three images of a special flower. 
I've Googled the image a lot.

It's called the Tudor Double Rose. 
It's the family crest of the Tudor family.

This rose symbolizes the end of the War of the Roses, 
the reuniting of the Houses of York and Lancaster.

So a Tudor rose on a tudor building, makes sense.

But there are more than just two of these roses.

As you walk around the building, you begin to see roses everywhere: in clay, cement, stone, metal, lacquer and wood.

I can count at least twenty different types the rose.

I'm not talking dozens of roses. I'm talking hundreds of roses.

Even the Brutalist-style building at the back has roses.

So why does Julia obsess on the rose?
What is she whispering?

Here is my theory:

The rose is an ancient symbol of love.

On Valentines Day, what do you send to someone you love? 
A dozen roses, of course!

Robert Burns wrote: 
"O my Luve is like a red, red rose"

In designing this home for women in need, 
Julia Morgan wrapped them — and us — 
in a quiet message of safety, comfort — and love.

And indeed, these the message of resonates to this day

After these talks,
Kindly go up to the art gallery on the second floor.

There's an exhibit 
on the history of the building 
and the art of its residents.

The exhibit is a love letter to the building.

From a community filled with love.

Julia is still speaking to us.

Julia is whispering, 
"You are standing in one of my loveliest buildings in San Francisco"

Let us return the compliment.

Let us speak to Julia.

Kindly raise your glasses.

To Julia Morgan! We love you! << too much??


May your legacy continue to speak to us for many years to come.

Thank you
