Anglican-Lutheran International Commission 
The Hanover Report 
THE DIACONATE AS ECUMENICAL OPPORTUNITY 
Published for the Anglican Consultative Council and the Lutheran World Federation 
Published by Anglican Communion Publications, London, England 
Cover by Andrew Day Designs, Canterbury, England 
Printed by Rapier Press 
© 1996 The Secretary General of the Anglican Consultative Council 
The General Secretary of the Lutheran World Federation 
Tom Dorris, Deacon 
in memoriam 
Contents 
FOREWORD .......................................................................................................................3 
I INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................5 
II THEOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS FOR THE DIACONATE AND DIACONAL 
MINISTRY ...................................................................................................................6 
A. CHRIST, KINGDOM, AND SPIRIT ..................................................................6 
B. THE CHURCH....................................................................................................8 
C. DIACONAL MINISTRY ....................................................................................9 
III DIVERSITY AND COMMONALITY OF PRESENT FORMS OF DIACONAL 
MINISTRY .................................................................................................................11 
A. DIVERSITY AND UNITY ...............................................................................11 
B. VARIOUS FORMS OF DIACONAL MINISTRY...........................................12 
C. COMMON PRINCIPLES .................................................................................14 
IV AN ORDAINED DIACONATE.................................................................................16 
2 
A. THE QUESTION OF AN ORDAINED DIACONATE ...................................16 
B. THE MEANING OF ORDINATION IN RELATION TO THE 
DIACONATE....................................................................................................17 
C. THE RENEWAL OF THE DIACONATE AS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR 
UNITY AND JOINT MISSION........................................................................19 
V CONCLUSION...........................................................................................................21 
Appendix 1 Anglican-Lutheran Consultation on the Diaconate...........................................22 
Appendix 2 The Anglican-Lutheran International Commission .......................................23 
3 
FOREWORD 
by the Co-Chairs 
Lutherans and Anglicans, like Christians of many other traditions, have been engaged 
during recent decades in much debate about the nature of ministry - both the ministry of 
the whole people of God and that of specific ordained ministers. This debate was 
intensified by the publication in 1982 of the Lima document Baptism, Eucharist and 
Ministry (BEM), which intentionally raised many fundamental issues of ecclesiology, 
ministry and ordination. 
A new approach was pioneered by the Anglican-Lutheran International Commission 
(ALIC) in the Niagara Report (l987), which tackled the question of episcope, or pastoral 
oversight, from the perspective of the church's mission. This produced a breakthrough in 
Anglican-Lutheran understanding which has already borne fruit in the proposed 
Concordat of Agreement (1991) in the USA and the Porvoo Common Statement (1992) 
between the British and Irish Anglican Churches and the Nordic and Baltic Lutheran 
Churches. 
ALIC believed that the next logical step would be to undertake a fresh joint study of the 
diaconate, especially since the threefold ordering of the ordained ministry had long been a 
central issue in Anglican-Lutheran dialogue. The atmosphere of openness and growing 
trust between us has given us the confidence to work together on this question, where 
perplexities and real differences are evident, yet without their being church-dividing. Our 
desire has been to learn from each whatever could be useful for the common mission we 
share, and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. 
From the outset of this project we were aware that our theological reflection needed to be 
rooted in the experience and concerns of those who actually exercise various diaconal 
ministries. We record our gratitude to the consultants' names in Appendix 1, to whose 
evidence and convictions we paid serious attention. 
We were equally aware that some churches do not have an ordained ministry distinct from 
that of the presbyter/pastor. The subject-matter of this report is, nevertheless, directly 
relevant where, in response to specific needs, forms of ministry have sprung up which 
could be better recognised and utilised if seen in the context of diaconal ministry. Not 
only those people engaged in such work, but those whom they serve and with whom they 
co-operate, can be helped to value this diaconal ministry more highly. 
Our aim is to offer a theological rationale which follows a clear line of argument: from 
Christ and the Spirit, through the ministry of the whole people of God (including ordained 
ministry) to an understanding of the diaconate. The latter part of this study focuses on the 
role of the ordained deacon in particular, as distinct from the broader understanding of 
diakonia. 
4 
We desire to know far more than we have yet discovered about the impressive range of 
diaconal ministries, and are sorry that our limited resources did not permit us to make a 
wider factual survey. We have been glad to discover that a number of working parties and 
research projects on this theme are already under way in various churches throughout the 
world. This reinforces our conviction that a particular ecumenical opportunity lies in 
developing the diaconate, and we indicate in Appendix 3 the main factual points on which 
we would welcome information from church leaders and the chairpersons of diaconal 
associations and communities. 
We recommend this Hanover Report to our parent bodies, the Anglican Consultative 
Council and the Lutheran World Federation, and through them to their member churches 
throughout the world. We hope that it will serve as a catalyst for both joint study and joint 
action. We also dare to believe that it may have significance beyond these two world 
communions, and ask our ecumenical partners to study it in the context of the search for 
closer visible unity and of common service to God's world. 
By common consent the members of ALIC dedicate this report to the memory of the late 
Deacon Tom Dorris of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. For many years Tom 
exercised a skilled ministry in the Communications Unit of the World Council of 
Churches in Geneva, reporting and interpreting church affairs to the media. He was a keen 
advocate of a restored diaconate, and carefully collated the responses of all churches to 
the paragraphs in the Lima document on this subject. Not long after moving to new work 
with the Life and Peace Institute in Sweden he was tragically killed in a car accident in 
1994. We hope that this report will further the concerns to which he dedicated his life. 
We wish to express our particular thanks to those who played a key role in drafting and 
editing this report: Professor Michael Root (Strasbourg, France), the Very Revd William 
Petersen (Rochester, NY, USA) and the Revd Dr Walter Bouman (Columbus, Ohio, 
USA). We also pay a special tribute to our co-secretaries, the Revd Dr Eugene Brand and 
the Revd Dr Donald Anderson; for each of them the publication of this book coincides 
with their retirement from a long and distinguished period of ecumenical service at the 
international level. 
+ DAVID GRIMSBY PROFESSOR AMBROSE MOYO 
The Rt Revd David Tustin The Revd Prof Ambrose Moyo 
Bishop of Grimsby University of Harare 
England Zimbabwe 
5 
I INTRODUCTION 
1. The diaconate, an institution of great importance in the early church, is again coming 
to life in the church as a ministry and office closely related to central aspects of the 
church's identity: service, outreach, humility, concern for human needs. This 
reinvigoration of the diaconate has various roots: liturgical revival, a livelier sense of 
the church's mission in the world, and a renewed perception of rightful diversity in 
the church's ministries. These sources have together shaped the many forms of 
diaconate and diaconal ministry current today or under consideration in our churches. 
2. No ecumenical consensus has yet emerged on the nature and forms of the diaconate 
and diaconal ministry. Not only have different churches made different decisions 
about the diaconate, but debates continue within the churches about such fundamental 
questions as whether the diaconate is appropriately an ordained or lay ministry and 
whether those who intend to be ordained priest or pastor should first be ordained to 
the diaconate (the so-called "transitional diaconate"). The diaconate and diaconal 
ministries are still in flux in many churches. New forms of diaconate have been 
recently introduced in some churches, with varying degrees of acceptance, and are 
under study in other churches. While the nature of the diaconate is not an issue which 
lies at the centre of the faith, the restoration and reinvigoration of the diaconate 
affects the structure of the whole church's ministry. It not only reshapes mission, but 
directly touches the vocational lives of persons engaged in ministry. The debate over 
the diaconate thus has highly practical implications. 
3. Transition and flux in the diaconate have been heightened by recent exegetical work 
on the meaning of the word diakonia in the New Testament and early church. Earlier 
work had argued that waiting at table and service of a humble sort was the term's 
paradigmatic sense. Diakonia as a term for Christian ministry was thus taken to refer 
especially to a character of humble service that should be typical of all ministry in the 
name of Christ. 
4. More recent exegetical work, especially by John Collins in his Diakonia: 
Reinterpreting the Ancient Sources, (Oxford: 1990) has called this earlier consensus 
into doubt. In the world in which the early church lived, diakonia seems to have 
referred to the service of a "go-between" or agent who carries out activities for 
another. In the letters of Paul, it also appears that diakonia is used to describe Paul 
and some of his associates as the "go-between" who carries the gospel from God or 
Christ to those who are to hear the message of salvation. Diakonia seems more 
concerned with apostleship than with our present understanding of the diaconate. 
Though scholars continue to debate, their findings cannot be ignored and have played 
an important part in this study. 
5. Institutional and conceptual change in relation to the diaconate and diaconal ministry 
should be grasped as an opportunity to explore new forms of mission. This study has 
been especially concerned to consider the diaconate and diaconal ministry as an 
ecumenical opportunity, an opportunity for common mission among the churches. 
6 
Ecumenical progress must not remain a matter of theological discussions or formal 
agreements, but needs to reach into and be nourished by common life and mission. In 
moving from its earlier study of episcope (The Niagara Report - Report of the 
Anglican-Lutheran Consultation on Episcope 1987) to its present study of the 
diaconate, the Anglican-Lutheran International Commission (ALIC) has not moved 
from issues of primary ecumenical importance to secondary issues, but rather has 
moved deeper into the heart of the one church's mission. In addition, while this study 
was carried out by a bilateral commission, observers from other ecclesial traditions 
were involved in the commission’s preliminary work and ALIC hopes that the study's 
results will be relevant well beyond the two traditions. 
6. Within both the Anglican and Lutheran communions, the nature of the diaconate and 
the possibilities of its renewal have been much discussed in recent years. A study at 
the international level was requested by the 1988 Lambeth Conference and by a 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) consultation on ministry held in 1992 in Cartigny, 
Switzerland. In response to these requests, the following study was proposed by 
ALIC at its meeting in Johannesburg in February 1993 and approved by the Standing 
Committee of the Anglican Consultative Council and Primates' Meeting in March 
1994 and by the Council of the LWF in June 1994. Background papers were 
commissioned for a preparatory consultation in April 1995 in West Wickham, Kent, 
England. This consultation produced the outline of a statement on the diaconate. On 
the basis of the papers and outline from the earlier consultation and with the 
participation of four expert consultants, ALIC developed the following text at their 
meeting at Kloster Wennigsen, near Hanover, Germany, in October 1995. The West 
Wickham papers are available from the Anglican Communion Office in London. 
7. As The Niagara Report did with episcope, this study seeks to place the diaconate in 
the context of a more comprehensive vision of the mission of God in the world. It 
thus begins with a consideration of Christ and the Holy Spirit as the agents who 
always drive the church's ministry. The church is then discussed as the sign and 
instrument of the work of Christ and the Spirit. The church's mission and ministry 
then form the context for the discussion of the diaconate and diaconal ministry in the 
remainder of the text. 
II THEOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS FOR THE DIACONATE AND 
DIACONAL MINISTRY 
A. CHRIST, KINGDOM, AND SPIRIT 
8. Faithful diaconal ministry has been done and is being carried out under a great variety 
of circumstances and forms by the church and its members. In this document the 
Anglican- Lutheran International Commission uses a theological model which it 
7 
believes is especially suitable for locating diaconal ministry within the mission and 
ministry of the church as a whole. The church has both its historical and its 
theological basis in the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The resurrection of Jesus is the 
eschatological event (1 Cor 10:11) which discloses the crucified one as “both Lord 
and Messiah" (Acts 2:36); which identifies him as the one who determines the 
ultimate destiny of the universe (1 Cor 15:24-28); and which discloses that he is “the 
head over all things for the church" (Eph 1:22). He is eschatological Lord because 
"death no longer has dominion over him" (Rom 6:9). All powers of the "old age" are 
dominated by death and are characterised by an unrelenting drive for self-preservation, 
at whatever cost to others. But if Jesus Christ has the last word, then he 
confers the freedom for self-offering on behalf of the world in the conviction that 
there is more to do with life than to preserve it (Mt 16:24-26 and parallels; cf. The 
Niagara Report, 22-23). 
9. The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the lens through which the church perceives Jesus 
own mission and ministry, and retells the story. The historical mission of Jesus was to 
announce the good news of the reign of God in proclamation and parables, to embody 
the reign of God in signs and actions, and to be the historical fulfilment of the 
promised final victory of the reign of God through his death and resurrection. (Mk 
1:14-15; Lk 17:21-22; Mt 11:2-6; Lk 11:20). In a slave's death (Phil 2:6-8) on the 
cross he endured the consequence of his own diaconal ministry. For Jesus was 
crucified because his messianic mission was to be God's saving embrace of all Israel 
and of all the world. On the cross Jesus was obedient to the sending and mission of 
the Father (Mk 14:32-37) in the power of the Holy Spirit (Mk 1:9-11). Jesus was sent 
by the Father to reconcile the whole creation to God (2 Cor 5:17-19). 
10. In Christ the victory of the reign of God over the powers of death and sin has begun. 
The leadership ministry of Christ is therefore not like leadership in the world of death 
and sin (Mk 10:41-45). It has a character and quality determined by Christ's way of 
being in and for the world, in the service of his Father. Christ Is determinative for the 
ministry and ministries of the church. He is the basis for the leitotourgia, the worship, 
of the church, for he offers and gives himself in free obedience (Heb 9:14; Gal 2:20; 
1 Cor 11:23-26; Jn 12:20-33, etc.). He is the basis for the martyria, the witness, of the 
church, for he is the foundational witness to the everlasting love of the triune God (Jn 
3:16: Rom 5:8). As the incarnate Word sent by the Father, Jesus is the basis for the 
church's diakonia, the freedom to announce and act out God's eschatological salvation 
(Rom 15:8). Christ is diakonos, servant, as the agent and image of the one who sent 
him, acting and forgiving with his Father's own power, mediating the Father's will to 
the world. Being diakonos does not mean that the roles of leader and servant are 
reversed or abolished, but rather that those who lead and rule do so as servants, that 
is, as agents of Christ's salvation (Lk 22:27). 
11. The outpouring of the Holy Spirit is the sign promised by Christ that the 
eschatological reign of God has come. At every point the presence and power of the 
Holy Spirit testifies that the final act of history has occurred in Jesus. The Holy Spirit 
came upon Mary in the conception of Jesus (Mt 2:1 8-20: Lk 1:35). The Holy Spirit 
descended upon Jesus at his baptismal commissioning (Mk 1:10 and parallels). The 
8 
Holy Spirit was promised as Christ's eschatological gift to his disciples (Acts 1:8: Jn 
14:15-17, etc.). 
12. Thus the outcome of the mission and ministry of Christ is nothing less than a new 
creation. The entire universe is encompassed by the love and care, the redeeming 
commitment and creative salvation of the Holy Trinity. 
B. THE CHURCH 
13. The church is both designated and called to be the effective sign and instrument of 
the reign of God. The eschatological reign of God, inaugurated by and inseparable 
from Jesus Christ, is the goal and promise of God in history. The reign of God is 
being served wherever institutions, communities, movements, and individuals 
contribute to peace with justice, to compassion for the suffering, to preservation and 
care of the creation, and to admonition and conversion of sinners. 
14. The church is called and admonished to reflect in its being and worship, its life and 
ministry, what God has done and is doing (Eph 4:1-6; Rom 12; Col 3:1-4,1: The 
Niagara Report, 24). The pattern of apostolic writing in Ephesians, for example, is 
that the church is exhorted and admonished on the basis of what God has done. In 
Christ the reign of God has already come. That means, among other things, that God 
has already broken down the wall of hostility between Jew and Gentile, male and 
female, slave and free (Gal 3:28; Eph 2:11-22). 
15. The church is called to witness to the reign of God. In this witness, the church 
confesses that Jesus is the Christ, even beyond the church where he is not recognized 
as such. One aspect of the church's witness to the reign of God is a critical 
recognition of where the reign of God is being served. The church is called to co-operate 
in humility with institutions, communities, movements, and individuals 
contributing to the vision of the reign of God. The church is called to identify, warn 
against, and oppose the powers of death and sin, without counting the cost. 
16. The church is created by the Holy Spirit. On the basis of the promise of Christ (Jn 
14:15-17, etc.) the community of disciples experienced the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:1-4; Jn 
20~2- 23). Acts 2:17 uses an eschatological formula, "in the last days", to introduce 
the vision of the prophet Joel. The Holy Spirit is now the dynamic of the entire 
community, young and old, women and men, and not just the dynamic of charismatic 
individuals. The Holy Spirit is the arrabon, the "down payment” on God's final future 
(Eph 1:14; 2 Cor 1:22 and 5:5). As "down payment" the Holy Spirit empowers and 
calls the church to live in anticipation of the consummation of the reign of God. The 
evidence of the Holy Spirit's presence is behaviour determined by being "in Christ" 
(Gal 5:22-26). Jesus' disciples are promised the Holy Spirit as the answer to their 
prayer (Lk 11:13). The church is therefore called to receive the prayer which Jesus 
taught it to pray (Lk 11:1-4) as the way Jesus shares with the church his own mission 
and ministry. The church prays for the Holy Spirit when it asks that God's name be 
9 
holy, that God's reign come, that it eat the messianic bread of the future, and that it 
anticipate God's final forgiveness by forgiving all who sin against it. 
17. The church is called to trust God's promise that the Holy Spirit will be given. The 
church is called to be open to the Holy Spirit, to receive the gift and the gifts of the 
Spirit, to recognise and seize the opportunities to serve the reign of God, and to 
accept with thanksgiving the ministries which serve the reign of God. 
18. The church becomes visible in its gathering as a eucharistic assembly. When the 
church gathers for "the Lord's Supper" (1 Cor 11:19), it becomes especially visible 
"as a church" (1 Cor 11:18). In Corinth it was evident that some of the members were 
not caring for other members in that meal which anticipates the consummation of the 
reign of God when God will be "all in all" (1 Cor 15:28). Just so, the church was not 
diaconal, was not proclaiming the Lord's self-offering for the world "until he comes" 
(I Cor 11:26). It is precisely in the eucharistic celebration that the eschatological 
consummation of the reign of God is anticipated (BEM, Eucharist, 21). 
19. The eucharistic celebration involves five actions: (1) The gathering of the baptised in 
one place as the koinonia of Christ with his people and as the koinonia of the people 
in Christ (Acts 2:42, 46; 1 Cor 10:1 6- 7); (2) attention to the Word of God; (3) the 
offering, in which the baptised offer themselves through prayer and gifts for service 
to the reign of God; (4) the meal of the presence of tile eschatological Christ which 
anticipates the messianic banquet; (5) The sending of the baptised into their daily 
mission and ministry. 
20. The eucharistic assembly as koinonia participates in and manifests the leitourgia, 
martyria, and diakonia of the Christ who is present to it and through it. It is in the 
eucharistic assembly that the church receives its identity (body of Christ) and its 
mission (to be offered for one another and for the world; 1 Cor 10:16-17; 1 Cor 
11:17-26). In gathering, Word, prayer, meal, and sending the church is called and 
embraced by Christ for his mission and ministry in the world. 
C. DIACONAL MINISTRY 
21. The liturgy provides the context for understanding the church's diaconal ministry. The 
celebration of the eucharist (see above, 18) has, in significant ways, shaped the 
governing structures of the church. In the Lutheran tradition, bishops (Augsburg 
Confession XXVIII) and ordained ministers in general (Augsburg Confession V) are 
defined by their connection with Word and sacrament. In the Anglican tradition, 
bishops, priests, and deacons are ordained into ministries that have to do with Word 
and sacrament. Both of these traditions reflect the vision and practice which comes to 
expression in ancient Christian documents (e.g., the Apology of Justin Martyr, the 
Didache, the Apostolic Constitution of Hippolytus). 
10 
22. The celebration of the eucharist is a paradigm for the interrelationship of various 
ministries in the church. It is, among other things, a kind of "dress rehearsal" for life. 
23. The liturgy is the work of the whole people of God. Ministry is, first, ministry of the 
church as a whole. The whole community is a priestly people (I Pet 2:9). Hebrews, in 
one passage, brings together the ministry of Christ and the interrelated ministries of 
leitourgia, martyria, and diakonia on the part of the people: "Therefore Jesus also 
suffered outside the city gate in order to sanctify the people by his own blood. Let us 
then go to him outside the camp and bear the abuse he endured. For here we have no 
lasting city, but we are looking for the city that is to come. Through him, then, let us 
continually offer a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that confess his 
name. Do not neglect to do good and to share what you have, for such sacrifices are 
pleasing to God" (Heb 13:12-16). 
24. The ministry of the whole people of God requires the ministries of individuals. 
Through baptism persons are initiated into the ministry of the whole church. 
Incumbent upon all the baptised is the exercise of leitourgia, martyria, and diakonia. 
However, baptism itself does not confer office in the church. "What is the common 
property of all, no individual may arrogate to himself, unless he is called" (Luther's 
Works, WA 6:566; American Edition 36:116). Office must be given by the church. 
Within the liturgy there is a variety of specific tasks to be performed; these tasks have 
traditionally been correlated with distinct roles in the liturgical celebration, e.g., that 
of presider and deacon, which have a symbolic function. 
25. There are some offices in the church which enact and bring into focus central aspects 
of the mission of the entire church and also form the identity of the person involved. 
This description applies particularly to ordained ministries. Such ministries involve 
an appointment or call from the church and a rite which includes prayer and the 
laying on of hands. In the church's rite, God is active, giving the gifts needed for 
ministry. Through leitourgia, martyria, and diakonia persons designated as God's gifts 
to the church become symbols of Christ and his church (BEM, Ministry, 12,15). 
26. A close relationship exists between liturgical celebration and diaconal ministry. The 
baptised have been given their calling and ministry by virtue of their baptism. That 
calling is renewed and reshaped by the liturgical celebration of the eucharist. The 
diaconal ministry of the laity receives encouragement and, where appropriate, 
leadership from the deacons of the church. 
27. The ministry of deacons was traditionally, and in some places is at present, expressed 
within the liturgical celebration of the gathered eucharistic assembly by assigning 
elements of the rite to the deacon: reading the gospel, leading the intercessions of the 
people, receiving the gifts of the people and "setting the table" for the meal, serving 
the eucharistic meal, sending the people from the eucharistic assembly into the world, 
administering the ceremonial. In the early church the social service carried on by 
deacons seems to have been rooted in the liturgical celebration (see the Apology of 
Justin Martyr). 
11 
28. The social services so central to the diaconal communities and ministries founded in 
the 19th century continue to be a vital aspect at the church's witness and ministry. 
These services were rooted in a rich worship and community life. The integration of 
worship and service remains a concern for the various diaconal ministries of the 
church. 
III DIVERSITY AND COMMONALITY OF PRESENT FORMS OF 
DIACONAL MINISTRY 
A. DIVERSITY AND UNITY 
29. In some traditions and congregations, recent liturgical renewal has included a revival 
of the specific liturgical role of the deacon (cf. 27). In other traditions, various 
members at the laity have assumed one or more of these ritual elements. 
Representatives of the laity served to encourage all the laity in their daily ministries. 
The revival of the deacon's specific liturgical role need not exclude liturgical 
expressions of lay ministry. It should give appropriate leadership to the diaconal 
dimension and character of the daily ministry of all the baptised. 
30. The diaconate and other diaconal ministries have taken highly diverse forms in the 
Lutheran and Anglican communions. Not only have the differences existed between 
the two traditions, but diaconal ministries within each tradition have been so 
multiform that they are difficult to categorise. Some generalisations can, however, be 
made about diaconal ministry in each tradition. 
31. The Anglican tradition has preserved an ordained diaconate, whether transitional or 
permanent, and "deacon" in an Anglican context usually refers to someone in this 
office. But Anglican churches also have deaconesses and other especially designated 
persons who carry out diaconal ministry (e.g., licensed lay workers, communities of 
religious). 
32. At the time of the Reformation, Lutheran churches did not preserve an ordained 
diaconate within a threefold ordering of ministry. "Deacon" in most Lutheran 
traditions refers to a person consecrated or commissioned to a ministry focused on 
parish work or social service, but not ordained, i.e., their ministry has not generally 
been seen as a form of the single ordained ministry, usually understood by Lutherans 
to be the office of Word and sacrament. Some deacons or diaconal ministers have 
liturgical roles. Deaconesses are known in many countries, many churches have a 
variety of diaconal ministries, and the ordained diaconate has been revived in some 
Lutheran churches. 
12 
33. The diversity of diaconal ministries in the Anglican and Lutheran churches is not a 
difference that breaks or blocks communion between our churches. The possibility of 
diversity in the diaconate and diaconal ministries has been affirmed in Anglican-
Lutheran dialogues since their beginnings in 1909 (Anglican Communion - Church of 
Sweden). 
34. To be ecumenically fruitful, diversity must be open to cooperation and mutual 
enrichment. Our traditions have influenced each other in diaconal ministry in the past. 
The Anglican tradition has held up the model of an ordained diaconate for all 
churches shaped by the Reformation of the sixteenth century. The deaconess 
movement that arose in nineteenth century German Lutheranism found an echo in the 
founding of similar communities in some Anglican churches. 
35. Diversity is always to be seen against the background of the one church of Jesus 
Christ, to which both Anglicans and Lutherans belong. On the one hand, diversity 
should thus be recognisably rooted in a shared set of beliefs and commitments about 
the mission and ministry of the church (see above, section II). Unity must not exclude 
diversity, but diversity should be transparent to unity. 
36. On the other hand, cooperation and enrichment are significantly furthered when our 
various diaconal ministries are informed about and can recognise each other. Some 
Lutheran-Anglican agreements have provided for a mutual canonical recognition of 
ordained deacons (e.g., the Northern European Porvoo Common Statement). Mutual 
acquaintance and recognition in diaconal ministries, however, should reach further 
than just canonical measures. Possibilities of common learning and work need to be 
explored. Deacons and diaconal ministers from our traditions already meet in national 
and international organisations devoted to diaconal ministry. A deeper knowledge of 
one another would further mutual support and encouragement, which might be 
especially important in places where only a few deacons from each tradition are 
present. If communion is truly a growing together into a common life, then a lively 
sense of a common diaconal mission, carried out in many ways, is an important 
aspect of communion. 
B. VARIOUS FORMS OF DIACONAL MINISTRY 
37. Many of the diaconal ministries within our churches arose in response to specific 
needs in our societies. The dominant factors in the diversity of diaconal ministries 
have been the various needs which they have sought to meet and the historical 
contexts in which they arose and which shaped their character. Diaconal ministries 
are thus often expressions of particular historical and cultural realities. 
38. While a clearer sense of the nature of the diaconate and diaconal ministry is needed, 
the flexibility and spontaneity that have characterised the development of many 
13 
diaconal ministries over the last two hundred years should not be lost. While 
respecting cultural and historical diversity, our churches must also be ready to reflect 
critically on these forms. Some may have outlived their usefulness. Some may need 
to be reformed. The churches need to be open to the development of new forms of 
diaconal ministry, as needs and the moment require. 
39. Certain forms of diversity need here to be especially noted in order to avoid 
misunderstanding, to further mutual recognition, and to avoid distortions. 
40. The most obvious diversity within and between our churches is between the diaconate 
as an ordained ministry and forms of diaconal ministry commissioned, set apart, or 
consecrated in other ways. The issues related to ordination are discussed below in 
section IV. 
41. An important variable in diaconal ministry is the form of commitment called for by 
different ministries. A significant number of such ministries call for extended or life-long 
commitment. Some call for commitment to life in community, in various forms 
and for various lengths of time. The form of commitment tends to reflect the 
interrelation of ministry and personal identity. When diaconal ministry involves 
personal identity and is not just a task (cf. paragraph 25), long-term or open-ended 
commitment is particularly appropriate. 
42. Different forms of diaconal ministry relate in different ways to the leadership and 
decision-making structures of the churches. Some were initially mandated by the 
central structures of church authority and are immediately responsible to those 
structures. Others arose as grassroots initiatives responsible to the church in more 
indirect ways. 
43. A relative freedom from the central decision making structures of the churches has 
permitted some diaconal ministries to be spaces where excluded groups (e.g., women) 
have been able to shape and exercise their own ministries. These ministries have 
addressed concerns sometimes ignored by the church leadership. 
44. The danger should be recognised that such ministries can become places where the 
ministries of women and other marginalised groups can be isolated and limited. 
Diaconal ministries with a specific focus should not be shaped in ways that reinforce 
oppressive stereotypes. Just as the entire life of the church, including its leadership 
structures, is being opened to all within it, so diaconal ministries which may 
previously have been identified with certain groups should be opened to all. For 
example, forms of diaconal ministry that have traditionally been seen as appropriate 
only for women can be seen as possible for men also. 
45. Some forms of diaconal ministry have been defined by specific tasks, e.g., work with 
youth or the sick. Others have been defined by a community, fellowship, or 
association which has then taken up a variety of tasks, e.g., some orders of 
deaconesses. There is no need to choose between these two forms of diaconal self-definition. 
The church at various times needs both forms of ministry, which to a 
14 
degree relate to different forms or ways of life to which individuals feel themselves 
called. 
46. Different forms of diaconal ministry call for different sorts of preparation and 
engagement. Some depend extensively on previous experience in church and world, 
and do not require a special preparation of the sort now associated with seminaries 
and university theological faculties. Others employ a more "professional" model of 
education and certification. Again, no universal judgement should be made that any 
particular model is the only one appropriate. Rather, careful consideration needs to be 
given to what forms of preparation and examination a particular task and role calls for. 
C. COMMON PRINCIPLES 
47. Within the diversity of present forms of diaconal ministries, some common principles 
can be recognised, applicable to both lay and ordained diaconal ministries. These 
common principles form a background against which we can recognise the various 
diaconal ministries in our midst. By identifying theological concerns related to 
various forms of diaconal ministry, they also can provide guidance in thinking about 
and shaping such ministries. Taken together, these principles do not provide an 
exhaustive description or definition of the diaconate or diaconal ministry. The variety 
that has typified and should typify diaconal ministries rules out such an exhaustive 
definition. That the relation of some ministries to what is here and elsewhere 
described as diaconal ministry is sometimes unclear is in itself not a problem. 
48. A general description of diaconal ministers can be given: Diaconal ministers are 
called to be agents of the church in interpreting and meeting needs, hopes, and 
concerns within church and society. 
49. As agents of the church, deacons and diaconal ministers do not pursue a simply self-initiated 
and self-accountable ministry. While traditionally deacons were understood 
to be agents of the bishop, diaconal ministers today are often agents of congregations 
or other church bodies. In all cases, however, diaconal ministry is carried out in the 
name of the church. 
50. Such a relation of agency implies a relation of accountability. Accountability is a 
many-sided relation. Diaconal ministers must account to the church for their 
ministries. The church, however, is also accountable for providing adequate support 
and preparation for diaconal ministries carried out in its name. Accountability should 
not become a relation of subservience which would hinder the spontaneity and 
flexibility which diaconal ministry often needs, and which would rule out the 
possibility of diaconal ministry expressing a prophetic critique of the church. 
Diaconal ministers can also at times model special forms of Christian life. Such 
critique and modelling must be for the sake of the wider church, however, if diaconal 
ministry is to be understood as ministry that represents the church. 
15 
51. Diaconal ministry typically not only seeks to mediate the service of the church to 
specific needs, but also to interpret those needs to the church. The "go-between" role 
of diaconal ministry thus operates in both directions: from church to the needs, hopes, 
and concerns of persons in and beyond the church; and from those needs, hopes, and 
concerns to the church. 
52. Precisely as ministry that represents and is an agency of the church, diaconal 
ministries are not only ministries of service (diakonia), but also of witness (martyria) 
and worship (leitourgia). If diaconal ministry is carried out in the name of the church, 
then it is only rightly carried out in the name of Christ and to the praise and glory of 
God. The revival of a specific liturgical role for deacons in some churches points to 
the witness and worship which occur throughout their ministry. 
53. The interrelation of service, witness, and praise may vary widely in different forms of 
diaconal ministry. Though the present understanding of the meaning of diakonia in 
the New Testament is undergoing change, service typically forms the central 
emphasis of diaconal ministry. This service is liturgically focused and brought to the 
recognition of the church in the various roles of the deacon in the eucharist. 
54. The church's service, however, must not cease to be a witness to the Christ who is 
among us as one who serves. Diaconal ministry is a form of discipleship and should 
be recognisable as such. The witnessing aspect of diaconal ministry was, and in some 
of our churches still is, symbolised by the deacon reading the gospel within the 
church's liturgy. This role symbolises the witness of diaconal ministry, which 
nevertheless finds its centre in the witnessing character of its service. 
55. Like all aspects of the Christian life, diaconal ministry is to the praise and glory of 
God. This aspect of diaconal ministry should be particularly evident in the joy and 
hope which should shine through diaconal ministry, even in situations which would 
seem to induce despair. Again, this doxological aspect of diaconal ministry is 
symbolised by specific roles deacons and diaconal ministers can and have played in 
the liturgy of the church, e.g., proclaiming the resurrection in the Easter Vigil through 
the Exultet. The leitourgia of diaconal ministry also includes lament and intercession. 
The deacon thus traditionally, and today again in some churches, gathers and leads 
the congregation's intercessory prayers. Again, however, these liturgical roles 
symbolise the true centre of the leitourgia of the diaconal ministers, which is to be 
found in their daily ministry. 
56. As a specific and focal form of a task to which all Christians are called, the service of 
one's neighbour, diaconal ministry should foster and bring to wider recognition the 
ministry of others, rather than making their ministries redundant or superfluous. The 
diaconal minister should lead and inspire the wider church in its service. Here the 
interpretive role of diaconal ministry plays a special role. Diaconal ministries will 
have their own specific tasks which are their own responsibility. As a ministry of the 
whole church, however, this ministry should have a multiplying effect, leading others 
to their own specific tasks of service. 
16 
57. As a ministry of the church, diaconal ministry is not the ministry of isolated 
individuals, but should reflect the personal, collegial, and communal aspects of the 
church's ministries (cf. BEM, Ministry, 26). One possible form of such collegiality is 
the mutual support and communal life of the various communities, associations, and 
mother houses that have proved important to the vitality of many diaconal ministries. 
These forms of life have provided important opportunities for mutual support in often 
invisible and thankless work, have called forth special gifts, and have provided 
examples of committed community for other ministries and the church. 
IV AN ORDAINED DIACONATE 
A. THE QUESTION OF AN ORDAINED DIACONATE 
58. Previous sections have laid the foundation for a more focused consideration at this 
point of a renewed or re-established diaconate within the ordained ministry. Unless 
otherwise specified, in this section the terms "deacon" and "diaconate" refer to an 
ordained ministry. 
59. It is important to reiterate here that questions surrounding the renewal or the re-establishment 
of the diaconate as an ordained ministry in the contemporary church do 
not constitute a church-dividing problem for Lutherans and Anglicans. The way in 
which Lutherans and Anglicans today hear the questions surrounding the diaconate is 
coloured by their differing histories. These questions are, nevertheless, addressed in 
the context of remarkable ecumenical agreements already existing between the two 
traditions as they move toward the explicit goal of full communion. Such agreements, 
on the one hand, fully document mutual concern for the historical ordering of 
ministry as a sign of apostolicity, and, on the other hand, find in such a common 
grounding the basis for a certain freedom to address critically the issues around the 
effective ordering of ministries in the contemporary church as it seeks to serve and 
proclaim the gospel. 
60. Contemporary discussion about a renewed or re-established diaconate is, of course, 
by no means limited to our two traditions. Wider catholic tradition, contemporary 
scholarship, and ecumenical conversation place before Lutherans and Anglicans 
questions concerning a renewed diaconate. Three sources in particular inform present 
reflections: (1) the insights of BEM on the diaconate (Ministry, 31); (2) the historical-philological 
corrective to earlier understandings of the diakon-words provided by 
John Collins' Diakonia (see above, 3f); and (3) the long tradition that finds the 
paradigm for the entire ministry of the deacon in the deacon's liturgical role in and 
about the paschal proclamation (Exultet) at the Great Vigil of the Resurrection. 
17 
61. From these sources there emerges a renewed definition of diaconate for our time that 
understands deacons to be not merely an inferior order of ministers exercising lowly 
service, but agents ordained to assist the community's presider (bishop/presbyter), 
both in the proclamation and celebration of Word and sacrament, as well as in the co-ordinating 
of the community's diakonia in Christ. As in the paschal liturgy, the 
deacon not only proclaims "the light of Christ", inviting the people to join in praise 
and thanksgiving, but also leads the community into ministry with "the light of 
Christ". While remaining faithful, then, to ancient theological understandings and 
structures of ministry, such a definition, in fact, provides challenges as well as 
opportunities for both the Lutheran and Anglican traditions as they have historically 
addressed and carried out the diaconate and diaconal ministries. 
62. In both traditions the distinctive role of the diaconate within the ordained ministry has 
been absorbed into the presbyterate on the basis of developments that obtained in the 
western church from the middle ages to the eve of the 16th-century reformations. The 
Anglican tradition, for instance, preserved the form of the diaconate, while the 
Lutheran tradition for the most part did not. Furthermore, where Anglicans retained 
some semblance of a liturgical role for the diaconate in Word and sacrament, 
pastorally they treated the order essentially as an apprenticeship for presbyterate. 
Among Lutherans the diaconate as an order within the one ministry of Word and 
sacrament did not survive. Rather, a revival of lay diaconal ministries, carrying out 
socio-caritative-educational work without a liturgical base in the church, has 
characterised most Lutheran practice since the nineteenth century. 
B. THE MEANING OF ORDINATION IN RELATION TO THE DIACONATE 
63. In the contemporary situation the meaning of ordination in relation to the diaconate is 
an issue of central importance. 
64. For many (but not all) Lutheran churches, the ordination of deacons would be a new 
development requiring a convincing rationale. Specifically, such a proposal would 
require a broader understanding of the traditional Lutheran doctrine of ordained 
ministry. For many (but not all) Anglican churches, whether they are for or against 
the renewal of the diaconate, retention of it in "form only" has grown increasingly 
problematic in the contemporary situation. Thus it becomes necessary to reconsider 
the language used in relation to ordination itself. In the case of a renewed or re-established 
diaconate, ordination (1) is into both an activity and an identity; (2) calls 
for some kind of open-ended or life-long commitment; (3) includes recognition as 
being within the one ordained ministry of Word and sacrament; and (4) entails a 
symbolic as well as a practical relationship to the whole community that provides for 
the public exercise of this ministry as well as for its accountability. Such a way of 
talking about the diaconate has the advantage of going through and beyond the old 
dichotomies of "functional" versus "ontological" by giving the diaconate a 
specifically ecclesiastical location and expression (see above, 25). 
18 
65. In this regard, appropriate reference can be made to those significant statements in 
BEM (Ministry, 29-31) that deal with the unity as well as particular characteristics of 
ordained ministry, whether of the bishop, presbyter, or deacon. Here within the one 
ordained ministry may be found a threefold expression on the basis of the principle 
"distinction without separation". Yet with respect to a renewed or re-established 
diaconate, it is precisely here that challenging issues arise for Lutherans and 
Anglicans. In addition, both traditions also face questions about the relation of this 
order to (1) the presbyterate, (2) those already exercising non-ordained diaconal 
ministries, and (3) all the baptised (laos). In each, there exist both problems and 
opportunities. 
66. Thus, for instance, Lutheran churches without an ordained diaconate are challenged 
to consider whether such a diaconate as has been described above (including a 
liturgical grounding in the ministry of Word and sacrament) would be of value in 
their service of the gospel and, if so, whether a diaconal ministry more reflective of 
the practice of the wider church and Christian tradition could appear as a legitimate 
development for Lutherans. 
67. Anglican churches are challenged to restore to the diaconate (as defined above) its 
character as a lifelong and distinct form of ordained ministry, including with its 
liturgical function a pastoral focus on caritas and justitia in church and society. Such 
a restoration would imply both a reconsideration of the transitional diaconate and the 
possibility of direct ordination to the priesthood of persons discerned to have 
presbyteral vocations without their "passing through" the diaconate. The possibility of 
such direct ordination is not excluded on historical or theological grounds. 
68. In both traditions, the presbyters may perceive a renewed diaconate as a threat to their 
own identity and role. This will be especially so where the presbyteral office is seen 
as the embodiment of all ordained ministry. If, however, presbyters can welcome 
deacons as partners-in-ministry, both liturgically and within the church's mission, 
then they may themselves be freed to exercise a more focused ministry, bearing 
responsibility for the life of the community in Word and sacrament. In this way, too, 
the diaconate can stand as a witness against the perennial threat of clericalism, an 
ecclesiastical distortion rooted in exclusivist attitudes and practices. Deacons are 
called by the very nature of their order to stand as a witness to presbyters and bishops 
that the authority of all ordained ministry is for service alone. 
69. The re-establishment of a diaconate within the ordained ministry need not appear as a 
denigration of the work of diaconal orders, agencies, or persons who exercise 
ministries to, for, and with the oppressed, the marginalised, or the poor. It would be 
surprising, rather, if deacons did not urgently strive to link these diaconal groups with 
the life of the congregations they serve in order more effectively to carry out together 
the church's mission. It might also occur through such contact that diaconal orders, 
agencies, or persons would, over time, come to a new appreciation of the connection 
between the worship that is at the heart of Christian communities and their own life 
of service. In turn, they might seek creative ways to connect this service with the 
liturgical life of congregations. 
19 
70. In our own day, one of the chief arguments against a renewed diaconate is often a 
concern that various ministries in worship now exercised by lay persons as the result 
of movements of liturgical renewal might be re-absorbed into a clerical order. It is 
asked whether a re-established diaconate will more generally usurp lay ministries. 
These concerns have arisen to the extent that laity have ceased in our age to be the 
passive recipients or consumers of ministry at the hands of the ordained and become 
active participants in the church's mission. If, however, deacons are understood as the 
very persons who (1) "represent to the church (laos) its calling as servant," and (2) 
"exemplify the interdependence of worship and service" (B EM, Ministry, 31), then 
we can address the concern that what deacons do is the same as what Christians in 
general could or should do. In fact, deacons have no special powers or activities 
exclusively reserved to them. What is, however, distinctive is their call to be publicly 
accountable servants of the church who have a charge to model, encourage, and co-ordinate 
diakonia. This is the particular call or vocation of the deacon that is not 
shared by all Christians. 
71. There are also professional implications in regard to a renewed or re-established 
diaconate in the contemporary church. Questions and concerns here, in fact, are often 
voiced prior to any sustained theological or ecclesiological reflection on the 
diaconate. At this point it must simply be indicated that a great diversity of approach 
is possible in dealing with a renewed diaconate according to ecclesiastical 
circumstances and missionary need. Thus a renewed diaconate could be exercised as 
full-time or part-time, stipendiary or non-stipendiary. When paid, remuneration could 
be from either church or non-church sources. Whatever the case, these questions are 
secondary to theological, liturgical, and ecclesiastical considerations. 
72. Finally, both traditions would be challenged to ensure that appropriate forms of 
education and formation for this ministry are developed within their various agencies 
of theological education. In such planning and development it will be important to 
consider what aspects of diaconal formation and education will best be done in 
conjunction and community with those preparing for presbyteral or lay ministries and 
which parts solely with candidates for the diaconate. Given the nature of ordained 
diaconal ministry, the bulk of the preparation probably will need to occur in the 
former manner. In any case it will be important that formation in diakonia, as well as 
in the ability to form others in diakonia occurs. 
C. THE RENEWAL OF THE DIACONATE AS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR 
UNITY AND JOINT MISSION 
73. The renewal of the church's diaconate at this time presents a unique opportunity for 
deepened unity and joint endeavour in the life and mission of the Anglican and 
Lutheran, as well as other churches. 
20 
74. The process of ecumenical dialogue and theological reflection is one which itself 
helps to build and deepen koinonia among Christians of different communions. 
Discussions about the place and practice of diakonia in baptised and ordered 
Christian life can positively influence the future of the church and how the church is 
seen and manifested in the world. Not only do such discussions help to further the 
work on ministry begun in BEM, they also contribute to an overarching 
ecclesiological vision which can strengthen the bonds among Christians of the 
Lutheran, Anglican, and other traditions. 
75. The diaconate offers a theme for ecumenical exploration which can result in a more 
effective co-ordination of efforts to renew mission and liturgy both within and among 
these differing traditions. It is an exploration which pushes churches to rethink 
existing assumptions, and to reach greater clarity in their theological and functional 
understanding of the offices of presbyter and bishop. Such clarity can only help to 
enhance liturgical practices and the way in which they shape the intentional daily 
ministry of all baptised Christians. 
76. The contribution of the diaconal movement initiated in the 19th century by the 
churches in Germany and spread throughout the Lutheran communion has set an 
inspiring example of diaconal works already being performed by many Christians, 
both individually and corporately, both unofficially and in the name of the church. 
Raising the possibility of an ordained diaconate, visibly incorporated into ordered 
ministry and eucharistic liturgy, challenges the church in every location both to take 
greater ownership of diakonia as a sign of apostolicity and to encourage the whole 
people of God to understand their daily life as an arena for Christian service. 
Likewise, the emergence of a distinctive, lifelong ordained diaconate in the Anglican 
Church invites all Christians better to integrate worship and service in their daily 
lives. A revitalised diaconate can be a means for equipping the laity to become 
serving leaders in their various callings and for mobilising them to become effective 
agents for the transformation of worldly structures and institutions. 
77. The church's diakonia is characterised by practical expressions of God's redeeming 
love in concrete acts of justice, reconciliation, and healing. A renewed diaconate can 
effectively strengthen these acts with the church's authority and blessing by linking 
them with the eucharistic meal. Such a renewal opens the door for shared endeavours 
which can be undertaken locally and by the wider church. Indeed, such associations 
of diaconal communities as the Kaiserswerthe Diakonieverband, Diakonia, the World 
Federation of Diaconal Associations and Diaconal Communities and its regional 
bodies, represent ecumenical and collaborative possibilities which should be further 
explored. 
78. Regardless of differing practices and assumptions, deacons and diaconal ministers of 
all traditions are closely bound together by their common awareness of exercising 
servanthood within and beyond the church, wherever hope and suffering present 
opportunities for justice and healing. There is a powerful potential for further 
initiatives along these lines: 
21 
• Anglican and Lutheran parishes and congregations sharing the ministry of deacons 
and diaconal ministers of either tradition, borrowing or seconding deacons and 
diaconal ministers in areas where one or the other tradition is sparsely represented; 
• joint presentations at synodical or convention gatherings on the "needs, hopes and 
concerns of the world" as perceived and experienced by deacons and diaconal 
ministers; 
• invitations to deacons or diaconal ministers of one tradition to participate in the 
liturgies of the other, particularly on major occasions; 
• opening up diaconal associations of a "third order" type to women and men of both 
traditions exercising diaconal ministry; 
• initiating joint pilot or demonstration projects using pooled resources from Anglican 
and Lutheran jurisdictions to encourage experimentation and learning with regard to: 
• new patterns of stipendiary and non-stipendiary ministry; 
• ways of discerning diaconal as distinct from presbyteral vocations and encouraging 
churches, where ready, to ordain accordingly; 
• theological and ministerial training and formation; 
• encouraging and supporting churches which may not at this time have a diaconate to 
initiate a diaconate as appropriate to their ministry needs. 
V CONCLUSION 
79. This study has been conducted under the theme of the diaconate and diaconal 
ministries as an ecumenical opportunity for the contemporary life and mission of the 
churches. If diaconal ministry is to be pursued in the name of the wider church, it 
must be ecumenically open. In a situation of division, most diaconal ministries will 
be rooted in and accountable to a particular church body. Nevertheless, the mandate 
of diaconal ministry is laid upon the entire church of Jesus Christ. The call to witness 
to the unity we have been given and to contribute to the unity we' seek is also 
addressed to deacons and diaconal ministers. Precisely because diaconal ministry is 
not burdened with the problems of validity and canonical recognition which hinder 
our visible unity in the exercise of presbyteral and episcopal ministry, we are called 
all the more to take up the possibilities before us for common diaconal ministry. The 
question and opportunity thus become clear: could forms of joint, common, or united 
diaconal ministry precede and clear the way for a joint, common, or united 
presbyterate or episcopacy? Joint oversight of diaconal ministries could provide a 
focus for movement into a joint exercise of episkopé. Our churches and our diaconal 
ministers need to be imaginative in shaping diaconal ministries ecumenically. 
22 
Appendix 1 Anglican-Lutheran Consultation on the Diaconate 
Emmaus Centre, West Wickham, Kent, England 
24-30 April 1995 
Anglicans 
* The Rt Revd David Tustin - Co Chair 
The Revd Canon Dr Sebastian Bakare 
* The Very Revd William Petersen 
Deacon Ormonde Plater 
* The Rt Revd Barry Rogerson 
The Revd Sr Teresa (J White), CSA 
* Deacon Maylanne Whittall 
* The Revd Dr Donald Anderson - Co Secretary 
Lutherans 
* Prof Dr Ambrose Moyo - Co Chair 
The Revd Dr Risto Ahonen 
* The Revd Dr Walter Bouman 
* Prof Dr Sven-Erik Brodd 
* The Rev Dr Norma Cook Everist 
Prof Dr Carter Lindberg 
Schwester Anna-Maria aus der Wiesche 
* The Revd Dr Eugene Brand - Co Secretary 
Consultants 
Prof Dr Michael Root 
The Revd Dr Dieterich Pfisterer [unable to attend] 
Orthodox Participant 
Ms Kyriaki FitzGerald 
Roman Catholic Participant 
The Revd Mgr William Steele 
Administrative Secretary 
Ms Christine Codner 
* Also attended the Anglican-Lutheran International Commission Meeting held in 
Hanover, Germany October 1995 
23 
Appendix 2 The Anglican-Lutheran International Commission 
Hanover, Germany 
5-11 October 1995 
Anglicans 
The Rt Revd David Tustin - Co Chair 
The Revd Dr John Flynn [unable to attend] 
The Rt Revd Charles Mwaigoga 
The Rt Revd Sumio Takatsu 
The Very Revd William Petersen 
The Rt Revd Stephen Sykes [unable to attend] 
The Revd Dr Donald Anderson - Co Secretary 
Lutherans 
The Revd Dr Ambrose Moyo - Co Chair 
The Revd Dr Walter Bouman 
The Rt Revd Dr Tore Furberg 
The Revd Dr Christa Grengel 
The Revd Dr B C Paul 
The Revd Dr Karlheinz Schmale 
The Revd Dr Eugene Brand - Co Secretary 
Consultants 
Prof Dr Sven-Erik Brodd 
The Revd Dr Norma Cook Everist 
The Rt Revd Barry Rogerson 
Deacon Maylanne Whittall 
Administrative Secretaries 
Ms Christine Codner 
Ms Irmhild Reichen-Young 
