Egypt’s Sinai Oasis

By Martha Nell Beatty

In 1972 ,my husband Denis  and I organized a trip  to Egypt  We included the musts,,
 but Denis, who had lived in Egypt in the late ‘70s,  suggested we include the little-known Siwa Oasis in the western desert 

But why Siwa?

It’s famed for historical reasons. The Temple of the Oracle of Amon is where Alexander was acknowledged as the son of Amon-Ra, the supreme god.  Siwa was one of the seven most revered of oracles in ancient times and the only non-Grecian one.  Most of the pharaohs felt the need to make the arduous trek to Siwa.
.
Cleopatra supposedly bathed in one of the many pools known for their therapeutic properties. Cleopatra Pool is believed to have been given her by Marc Anthony. The pool is surrounded by ancient ruins. 

It’s a place of serene beauty with its groves of palm and olive trees, salt water lakes and springs, and sand dunes

Perhaps part of its allure is its remoteness.  It’s not available to day trippers.

Our group of 15 set off  for Siwa in a mini-bus with our driver, our guide and an armed guard.  To get to Siwa we had to travel to the Mediterranean coast, where we overnighted in Alexandria.  Then we traveled south along the Libyan border. 

After visiting the fascinating sites and taking in the beauty, we arrived at our guest house. There we were greeted by a very pregnant woman, who later waited tables and also tended to the guest rooms. While we waited for our rooms, one of  our tour members, a doctor,  decided to make a visit to the kitchen.  He came out warning us to eat as little as possible as conditions  were definitely not hygienic.We nibbled on our dinner concentrating on stringy chicken and rice.

Our rooms did not look appealing or clean. I’m not even sure we changed into our night clothes   But I recall  that we slept fitfully on  top of our bed  coverings.  The next morning we were all  up and ready to go before our breakfast time.  After a hasty meal,  we boarded our bus.  As we were about to leave, one of  the staff rushed out with box lunches.  They were so hospitable and kind but we couldn’t wait to get  to Marsa Metruh on the Mediterranean for a welcome lunch.

Our group never complained.  They seemed to appreciate our desert venture as something unique and special. Something to talk about when home. 



